[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello and welcome.
Our topic today is
hallucinogens and culture.
We're going to examine the
way that various cultures
throughout the planet
have been influenced
in their social and cultural
and intellectual development
by hallucinogenic substances
in the food chain.
With me in the studio
is Terrence McKenna,
author, lecturer,
explorer, and philosopher.
Terrence is the co-author
with his brother
Dennis McKenna of a book called
"The Invisible Landscape, Mind,
Hallucinogens, and the I Ching."
He's also the co-author of
"Psilocybin, Magic Mushroom
Growers Guide."
He is the author of a computer
program called "Time Wave
Zero," and he's the
co-founder and president
of an organization called
Botanical Dimensions, which
devotes itself to saving
botanical plants used
in shamanistic traditions
throughout the world.
Welcome, Terrence.
>> It's a pleasure to be here.
>> It's a pleasure
to have you here.
I think a good starting
point for our discussion
would be the ancient
vedic culture of India,
one of the world's great and
one of the world's earliest
religions, the rigveda, is
considered by all scholars,
I think, to be one of the
most beautiful composite
of religious hymns and deep
philosophical discussions.
And yet when one reads
the rigveda carefully,
one discovers an
enormous emphasis
on a mysterious apparently
hallucinogenic substance
called soma.
>> Yes, you're quite right.
The ninth mandala
of the rigveda is
entirely devoted to singing
the praises of soma.
And yet we do not know
what soma is or was.
R Gordon Wasson spent
a considerable portion
of his life researching
this problem
and reached the
conclusion that soma
was amanita muscaria,
a mushroom that
is symbiotic to pine and
birch trees throughout much
of the North temperate zone.
However, scholars
have cast doubt
on his identification of soma.
Nevertheless, what we learn
from Wasson's scholarship
is that plants with
hallucinogenic chemical
principles in them have
had an enormous impact
on shaping the psychology
of various cultures,
both pre-literate and
literate, throughout the world.
>> It seems quite clear
that the references to soma
and the rigveda were
not really symbolic.
They refer to some
actual plant substance.
>> Oh, yes.
Definitely.
Some sort of plant substance
was prepared and ingested
by a priesthood, who then used
the ecstatic experience induced
by that plant as
the basis for all
of their metaphysical and
philosophical speculations
on the nature of the universe.
The case of soma is
by no means unique.
My own field of interest
was the Amazon basin
where we don't have a
great written literature,
but we do have an extensive
oral tradition and a tradition
of hallucinogenic plant use that
persists to the present day.
>> Mm-hmm.
Well, I think most notable
in South America is the drug
ayahuasca.
>> Yes.
Ayahuasca is perhaps the world's
largest and most thriving
psychedelic religion.
It touches the lives of
millions of mestizos and Indians
in the basin.
it is a combinatory drug,
which makes it especially
interesting to pharmacologists,
because its two principal
ingredients are,
themselves, inactive,
except in the presence
of each other.
So what we have in
the case of ayahuasca
is an example of a highly
evolved folk pharmacology.
And how a discovery
like this was ever
made in the first place is one
of the challenging questions
that anthropologists
have to deal with.
After all, in a square mile
of Amazonian rainforest
it is not unusual to encounter
50,000 distinct species
of plants.
How, then, did these so-called
primitive or pre-literate
people make the connection
between the combining
of the bark of one with the
leaves of another, boiled
and put through a
number of procedures
to produce an intense
visionary hallucinogen?
This is an extremely
interesting and to this day
unanswered question.
>> Isn't it the case that--
I believe it was the German
chemist who isolated this--
the chemical active
ingredient in ayahuasca,
originally named it telepathine.
>> Yes, that's right.
Based on field reports of the
states of group mind induced
by ayahuasca, which
is also called yagé,
he felt it was fitting
to name it telepathine.
Now, the rules of
scientific nomenclature
are such that the first
name of the compound
is always given precedent.
And about 20 years after
it was named telepathine,
it was realized that the
identical compound had
been isolated around
the turn of the century
from the giant Syrian
rue, Peganum harmala,
and named harmine.
So today the active
ingredients of ayahuasca
are known as harmine,
harmaline, and tetrahydroharman.
But your point is well taken.
The-- what struck the early
explorers and ethnographers
into the Amazon basin was the
fact that the people seemed
to be taking this plant
preparation in order to under--
undergo states of
community group mindedness.
And during these
intoxicating intervals,
social plans relative to
migration, hunting, and warfare
were undertaken by the
elders of the tribe.
And though the name
has been changed
to be more innocuous
harmine, nevertheless, there
is a continued
persistence of the feeling
that telepathic and
group mind states
are induced by this
particular plant mixture.
And it's particularly
interesting in the light
of the fact that the chemical
constituents, which make it go,
are, in fact, found
endogenously in the human brain.
These are not exotic
compounds from the point
of view of ordinary
human brain chemistry.
So there is a suggestion
there that manipulation
of neural humoral compounds,
brain neurotransmitters,
and that sort of
thing may, in fact,
open the door to untapped
areas of human potential.
>> I would imagine that many of
our viewers have seen the movie
"The Emerald Forest," which
seems to deal with the use
of substances of this sort
in the Amazon culture.
>> Yes.
John Boorman did a wonderful
job with that movie.
He was portraying the
use of epena, snuff.
That's a hallucinogenic
drug complex
that occurs in the eastern
part of the Amazon drainage
and in rural Venezuela.
Epena contains DMT and
is blown up the nostrils
by a co-operative friend,
and induces an intense state
of hallucinogenesis.
Yes, that was, I think,
most people's first exposure
to the real richness of the
visionary pharmacopoeia that
does exist in the Amazon.
>> And there's also the
suggestion there then, I guess,
that DMT would trigger
telepathic-like experiences
or clairvoyant types
of experiences.
>> That's right.
And DMT is also a product of
endogenous human metabolism.
It's interesting that the most
intense of the hallucinogens,
DMT, which you mentioned,
are the ones which
are most closely related
to our own brain chemistry.
So far from these compounds
being alien to the brain
or being an insult to the
physical brain, what they
really represent
are the shifting
of ratios of compounds already
present in the ordinary brain.
>> Well, DMT I believe
is dimethyltryptophan
>> Triptamine.
>> That's right.
It's related to the protein
tryptophan, is it not?
>> It's related to the
protein tryptophan.
It's also related to serotonin.
Serotonin is a neurotransmitter
which occurs in all life
and is most concentrated
in the higher primates
and most concentrated
there in man.
It is 5-hydroxytriptamine.
While DMT is, as you mentioned,
NN dimethyltriptamine.
So there is a very close
structural affinity
between this extremely potent
and exotic hallucinogen
and the very common basis
for ordinary consciousness,
serotonin.
That's correct.
>> Now other cultures around
the world have also used other
types of substances.
I think it might be interesting
to talk, at least briefly,
about alcohol, which is referred
to so often in the Bible,
for example.
>> Yes.
Well we tend in our culture
to make a radical distinction
between drugs and
foods with what
we call spices sort of falling
somewhere in the middle.
In point of fact, a
culture is what it eats,
and an individual's
personality is often largely
a reflection of their diet.
There has not been
a human culture
that did not bear upon it
the stamp of its relationship
to certain plants which altered
the individual and mass psyche.
We can think of
numerous examples.
The influence, for instance,
of sugar on the growth
of 19th century mercantilism.
Or the way in which
the British manipulated
opium policy in the Far East.
Or, as you mentioned,
alcohol, which
has always been the drug of
choice in Western culture.
Who can imagine modern
industrial office culture
without coffee?
These are major
drug dependencies
that have placed their stamp
on the lives of millions
and millions of people.
It's simply that we choose
to linguistically define it
in such a way that the
effect is not something
most people are cognizant of.
>> I think coffee is a
very interesting example,
because when it was first
introduced into our culture,
as I understand, it was
considered a virtually
a hallucinogenic drug.
>> Oh, yes.
When coffee was first
introduced into Western culture,
it was associated with
certain establishments
where loose women and
loud music were available.
And the bohemian literati
would gather and drink coffee
and talk into the night.
And it was considered
quite a risque thing
to be involved with.
That's right.
>> And wasn't tobacco also
viewed that way initially?
>> Yes, tobacco is
a very similar case.
The anthropologist Eduardo
Luna has pointed out
that tobacco, which had a
history of millennia of use
in the new world, was--
within 100 years of being
introduced into Europe
through Portugal was
being buried in the graves
of subarctic Lapland shamans.
So it shows how the
character of a drug
is quickly discerned by a
culture, even a culture that
is encountering that plant or
that drug for the first time.
>> It wouldn't be fair really
to talk about drugs without
mentioning socially what has
happened in Western culture,
particularly during the '60s and
early '70s when there was quite
a wave of psychedelic drug use.
>> Yes, that's right.
Following upon the
discovery of LSD
by Albert Hoffman in
the late '30s, and then
the writing on the subject
of the psychedelic experience
that was done by Aldous
Huxley, Metzner, and others,
it became a fad of the
self-exploring youth
culture of the '60s to be
involved with these things.
This was during a time
of great social upheaval
for other reasons,
and the end product
of that historical episode
was the complete suppression
of the study of
psychedelic drugs.
And in my opinion, to the great
detriment of the development
of psychology.
I feel that potentially
psychedelic drugs
could be for psychology
what the telescope became
for the science of astronomy.
The problem with
the psychedelics
is that they dissolve
cultural programming
and hence inherently have a
political charge about them.
You see, culture is the product
of the unperturbed human mind.
The human mind unperturbed
through the medium of language
erects institutions
and social structures
into which it then
secretes itself and lives
in a private Idaho.
A psychedelic drug will dissolve
these linguistic and cultural
assumptions.
It is a perturbation
of the mind,
and the perturbed mind
is a mind in the act
of rediscovering the nature
that lies outside of culture.
So this tension between cultural
values and what we might call,
for want of a
better word, reality
creates a tension
between institutions
and the users of the substances.
>> It's as if our culture,
if I understand you right,
acts as a filter between our
minds and direct experience
of reality.
And the drugs somehow blow
away that crust of culture
and allow more of a
direct nastic experience.
>> That's right.
And the business of
culture, any culture,
is to perpetuate
its cultural models.
And if the hallucinogenic
plants have not
been integrated into
the cultural model,
then they are definitely
seen as dangerous forces
for an unpredictable
sort of social change.
Now if the hallucinogenic
plants have
been integrated into
the cultural model,
this is not then a problem.
And this is the
case with shamanism.
Shamanism is the culturally
sanctified institution
of inner exploration
via psychoactive plants.
Where psychoactive
plants are not present,
shamanic institutions
tend to become
vitiated to rely on ritual
or ordeals or other methods
of eluciding-- eliciting
these ecstatic states.
But to my mind, and this
is a great argument which
rages in anthropology,
to my mind,
and I'm in agreement
with Wasson here,
the hallucinogenic plants
are the sine qua non
for an active shamanism.
>> For authentic?
>> An authentic shamanism.
That's right.
Now Mircea Eliade, who is the
great commentator on shamanism,
took an entirely
different point of view
and said that reliance on
what he called narcotics was
a decadent phase of shamanism.
But if we examine
Eliade's personal history,
I think it can be clearly
seen that this was simply
the cultural myopia
of a European scholar
in the great 19th century model.
>> Sort of still under the
sway of a Victorian sense
of morality.
>> Yes.
Taking the point of the
superior point of view
that while these are
primitive people,
surely our greater
epistemological sophistication
puts us in a position
to judge them.
>> You have the same
controversy, don't you,
now within the Hindu tradition
where we're many gurus say no
drugs and are
denying, I suppose,
the tradition of the rigveda,
which we spoke of earlier.
>> That's absolutely correct.
The Mahabharata, which
is the central core
text of late reformed Hinduism,
explicitly forbids mushrooms
to the Brahman class.
They are a forbidden food.
But in ethnography we're
taught that a taboo usually
indicates a previous
involvement and fascination.
And, in fact, the early
Hinduism of the vedic phase
was definitely more analogous
to the hallucinogenic shamanism
of the Amazon basin than it
is to the extremely stratified
Hinduism of modern India.
>> Do you find the use
of drugs of this type,
hallucinogenic drugs in
the tantric traditions,
the traditions that
deliberately use taboos in order
to inculcate higher
states of awareness?
>> Yes.
Well, when you go to
India, you discover
that the one thing that is
not stressed in Hinduism as it
is exported to the West is the
immense reliance on cannabis,
hashish, ganja, is the
staple of these Sadus.
This is a fact of
their daily life
that they are relying
on this for a constantly
reinforced contact with the
transcendental dimension.
>> Uh-huh.
You know, I think
it's interesting
how you referred earlier to
the shamanistic religions
as being the ones that
really have sanctified
the use of these drugs
for religious purposes.
And yet, we find in
our Western tradition,
Christianity has
come and in an effect
labeled these sorts
of things as diabolic.
For example, drugs,
I believe, were
used amongst various
witchcraft groups that
were persecuted by the church.
>> That's right.
However, the church
was concerned
that the magic of
the witches be seen
as real, number
one, and number two,
entirely caused by the
agency of the devil himself.
And so the church downplayed
the operational role
that plants had in
inducing these states.
Because after all, if the devil
cannot lead you astray without
the use of plants, why,
what kind of devil is it?
So in our own
historical tradition
there is a curious
blindness to the efficacy
of hallucinogenic plants.
>> I have heard, for example,
that in the old story
of witches using toad
skins in their brews,
that there is a drug
called bufotenine,
which is a hallucinogenic that
comes from the skin of toads.
>> Well, there was excitement
about bufotenine in the mid
'60s.
It was later shown to
be non-psychoactive.
However, since then toads
have been found which
do secrete DMT-like compounds.
And it's fairly clear that
the cauldron chemistry
of the witches, which relied on
datura, hellebore, monkshood,
henbane, these sorts of plants,
was a powerful visionary
chemistry.
Although these compounds,
the tropane alkaloids that
occur in those plants,
tend to be more deliriants
and confusants than what I
call the classical psychedelic
compounds, which are more
the triptamines and the beta
carbolines.
There are many chemical
compounds in nature
which are psychoactive, but
a much narrower spectrum
of these compounds
are truly what
we call psychedelic
or mind-manifesting.
>> Mm-hmm.
Now other than the obvious
spiritual and religious
implications, which
we see again and again
in different cultures, even,
I suppose we should mention,
the Native American
church and their use of--
>> Peyote.
>> --peyote.
What are the other kinds
of cultural developments
that we can trace to
the use of these drugs?
>> Well, I think the most
profound cultural development
is it is possible to make the
case that language itself is
an ability that was coaxed out
of an evolving primate species
by virtue of the fact that
there were hallucinogenic plants
in the diet of that creature.
You see, psilocybin has
been shown in low doses
to actually increase
visual acuity.
Well, at the stage of evolution
where human beings encountered
psilocybin mushrooms, we
were essentially baboon-like,
pack hunting hordes of velt
living creatures in Africa.
In that situation, a compound
which increases visual acuity
will give a tremendous
adaptive advantage
to the animals that are
including it in their diet.
And those animals not
including it in their diet
will be quickly
eliminated by the process
of natural selection from
the evolutionary scenario.
So it's possible to argue that
this mind-manifesting quality
of the psychedelics
actually conferred
an evolutionary advantage on
certain primates, who then were
able to bootstrap themselves
to higher and higher states
of reflective self-awareness.
This may lie behind the very
early coincidence of cattle,
goddesses, and mushrooms
in the apparent obsessions
of early man as reflected
by the cave paintings
on the Algerian plateau and
in southern France and Spain.
We always find the
notion of the mystery
circa 18,000 years ago connected
with the idea of cattle.
And we always find the cattle
connected with the notion
of the great goddess.
Now it may be that the
hidden and third member
of this trinity was a
hallucinogenic mushroom
of some sort.
>> We've got only
about two minutes left,
but I wonder what
the connection--
I don't quite see it-- between
the mushroom, the cattle,
and the goddess.
>> The mushrooms grow in
the manure of the cattle.
When the hunting packs of
early primates followed along
behind the cattle, they
inevitably encountered
the mushroom, ate it,
had their visual skills
thereby increased, bred
more readily, therefore,
and survive more easily than
their non-mushroom eating
cousins.
And so the eating of
mushrooms and the development
of higher aspects
of consciousness,
including self-reflection,
were, thereby, enforced,
leading to the conclusion
that it was actually
a symbiotic relationship
between the early primates
and these hallucinogenic
plants that
laid the basis for
the appearance of what
we call human beings.
>> Well, Terrence McKenna.
This is a very
interesting discussion.
You seem to be suggesting
that our evolution, I suppose,
from the animal kingdom
into the human kingdom
itself was catalyzed
or triggered
by our encounter with
these hallucinogenics.
And--
>> Yes, we are an ape with
a symbiotic relationship
to a mushroom.
And that has given us
self-reflection, language,
religion, and all the
spectrum of effects
that flow from these things.
>> Yeah.
And one can only wonder
how these hallucinogens
might affect our future
evolution as well.
>> They have brought
us to this point.
And as we make our
relationship to them conscious,
we may be able to take control
of our future evolutionary
path.
>> Terrence McKenna, thank you
very much for being with me.
>> It was a pleasure.
>> For me, too.
And thank you very
much for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]